Computer network is a set of nodes connected by communications links

Nodes-computer,printer (capable of send/receive data) devices that are connected to a network
communication links-wired(ethernet-switch/hub) or wireless links(wifi)

protocol:
set of rules to communicate(data transmitted over a network)

Topology:
Network topology refers to the physical and logical arrangement of nodes on a network. The common network topologies include bus, star, ring, mesh, and tree.

ipaddress:(logical address)
Every node in the computer network is identified with help of ip address.Routers need ip address to forward data

Mac address:(physical address)
Every node in the LAN is identified with help of mac address.switch need mac add to forward data
DNS-Domain name server is used to translate human readable domain name such as (www.google.com) into ip address that computer can understand.
Firewall-Firewall is a security device that is used to monitor and control the incoming and outgoing 
 network traffic.It is used to protect network from unauthorized access and other network threats

Port address:
Every process in a node is uniquely identified using port numbers.
In a node many processess will be running,data which are sent/received must reach right process

Switching:
It helps in deciding the best route for data transmission if there ia multiple paths in a larger network.One to one connection

Types of Computer Network architecture:
1.Cilent-Server Architecture:Nodes can be server or cilents.Server node can manage the cilent node behaviour.
2.Peer-to-Peer Architecture:Each devices is free for working as either cilent or server




Layering:
means decomposing the problem into more manageable components(layers)
layered architectures:
1.The OSI reference model
2.The TCP/IP Model

The OSI model:
Open System Interconnection
It is model for understanding and designing a network architecture that is flexible,robust
The pupose of osi model is to facilitate communication b/w diff systems without requiring changes to logic of hardware,software
It is a guidelines ,was never fully implemented

OSI Model layers:[refer javatpoint]
Application layer:
it enables the user to access the newtwork resources.(This layer provide services to the user)
services
File tansfer and access management,mail services,directory services

Presentation layer:
It is responsible for translation,encryption and compressions.

Session layer:
it establishes,maintains,and synchronizes the interaction among communication devices.
services
dialog control,synchronization

Transport layer:
It is responsible for process to process delivery of entire msg
services
port addressing,Sgementation and reassembly,connection control,end to end flow control,error control.

Network layer:
It is responsible for delivery of data from original source to destination network.
services
logical addressing(ip address),routing

data link layer:
It is responsible for moving data(framing) from one node to another node
services
framing,physical addressing(mac address),flow control,error control,access control

Physical layer:
It is responsible for transmitting bits over a medium (wired or wireless medium)
Services
Representation of bits,Physical characteristics of media,data rate

TCP/IP:
Developed prior of osi model,it is implemented model
Application,transport,internet,network access

HUB:
used to set up LAN,layer 1
Has multiple ports,star topology,has no memory
When packet arrives at one port ,it is copied to the other ports so that all segments of LAN can see all packets-disadvantages

Switch:
It is a networking hardware that connects devices on a computer network to establish a LAN
It has memory,stores MAC address in table,layer 2 device for setting up LAN

Router:
It is a networking device that forwards data packets between computer networks.
It is connected to at least two networks,commonly two LANs or WANs or a LANand its ISP's networks.
It is a layer 3(network layer) device,stores routing table



cmd:
1.ipconfig --ipaddress
2.ipconfig/all --macaddress
3.netstat -a --port address (or) resmon {It is an app it is not a command}
4.nslookup www.google.com --DNS Server: DNS stands for Domain Name System. DNS is basically a server that translates web addresses or URLs (ex: www.google.com) into their corresponding IP addresses. 
  We don’t have to remember all the IP addresses of each and every website. The command ‘nslookup’ gives you the IP address of the domain you are looking for. This also provides information on our DNS Server.
5.ping 142.250.195.164 -- 142 ...is a ipaddress of google.com or we can give (ping www.google.com).
  It checks whether google.com is reachable from my computer.And sends 4 packets and receives 4 packets means it is existing
6.tracert www.google.com --it will trace the route how it will reach the google.com like first will reach the default gateway that we see in ipconfig.
  This will show some details like timings, ipaddress from start to end ,end will ip address of google.com 
Port number:It is a communication endpoint from which data transmission are sent or received.      
Port number for those protocals:
1.Https-Hypertext Transfer Protocal Secure.port 443
2.Http- " " " " port 80
3.SSH -Secure shell port 22 
4.FTP- File Transfer Protocal port 21 
5.SMTP-Simple mail transfer Protocal port 25 
6.SNMP-Simple network management Protocal port 161
7.DNS-Domain name System  port 53
8.DHCP-Dynamic host Configuration Protocal port 67 
9.Telnet-port 23 
10.RDP-Remote Desktop Protocal-3389
11.Stp-Spanning Tree Protocal-388


Networking Devices:
Repeater,Hub,Switch,Bridge,Router,gateway

1.Repeater:It is a physical Layer device and it regenrates and retransmits the incoming weak signal /data in a single LAN.2port device .It does not amplify signal or increase the signal strength.
2.Hub:It is a physical Layer device and it is used to connect multiple devices in a single LAN.It broadcasts the received single/data to all ports of the hub
Two Tyes:Passive hub,Active hub
3.Switch:It is a data link Layer device and it is used to connect multiple devices in  a single LAN.It examines the destination Mac add to the corresponding device.
4.Bridge:It is a data link layer and it is used to connect 2 LAN working on a same protocal.It is used to divide large network into smaller segments.It also has Mac add reading capability and also regenrates the weak signal.
5.Router:It is network layer device and it is used to connect multiple LAN and WAN together working on  same protocal.It needs ip address to forward the data.
6.Gateway(protocal Convertor):It is used to connect dissimilar networks together working on different set of protocols.Depending on the functionality a gateway can operate at any of the 7 layer of OSI model.

Classification of Computer Networks:
1.Local Area networks 
2.Metropolitan Area networks 
3.Wide Area networks 

Local Area Network:
Computer networks that  interconnects computer within in a limited area such as school,lab 
we can setup lan within two ways:
1.Wired LAN(example:Ethernet -HUB,Switch)Ethernetis used to connect two Or more nodes
2.Wireless LAN(Example :Wi-Fi)


Metropolitan Area Network:
Computer network that interconnects users with computer resources in a geographic region of size 
MAN-Devices:
Switches and Hubs
Routers and Bridges 
  
Wide Area Network:
It is a telecommunications network that extends over the large geographical area for the primary purpose of computer networking
WAN-Devices
End devices and intermediary devices 


Topology :
Arrangement of nodes of a computer network.Topology means layout 

Physical topology:Placement of various nodes 
Logical topology:deals with the data flow in the network 

Various Network topology:
Bus 
Ring 
Star
Mesh 
Hybrid 

Bus topology:
            All data transmitted between nodes in the network is transmitterd over the common transmission medium and it will be received by all nodes simultaneously.Data can be flow in both direction.
            Advantages:Only one wire -less expensive 
                       Suited for temporary network
                       Node failure does not affect other node 
            Disadvantage:not fault tolerant 
                         Limited cable length 
                         no security 

Ring Topology:
             A ring topology is a bus topology in a closed loop 
             peer to peer lan topology
             Every node will have two connection one to each of its nearest  neighbors 
             communication is always unidirectional 
             sending and receviving data takes place with the help of a token 

             Advantage: It has better performac ethan bus topology
                        All node with equal access 
             Disadvantage:Unidirectional single point of failure will affect the whole network 

Star Topology:
             Every node is connected to a central node called hub or switch 
             Centralized Management 
             All traffic must pass through the hub or switch 

             Adavnatge:
                      Easy to design and implement 
                      Centralized adminstration 
                      Scalable 
            Disadvantage:Single point failure will affect the whole network 
                         due to overloades switch or hub 
                         Increased cost due to switch or hub  



Extented star topology:
               Two or more star topology is connected with the help of repeater 

Mesh Topology:
             Each node is directely connected to everyother nodess in the network 
             Fault tolerance and reliable 




Internet Protocal Address:
*It is  a unique address and every node in the computer network is identified with help of Ip address.
IP are logical address because we can the change the ip based on location of device.we can assign manually or dynamically. 
0.0.0.0 to 255.255.255.255
*2 Version of IP address:IPV4,IPV6
  IPV4-32 bit address
  IPV6-128 bit address 
*2 Types of IP address:
  Public IP
  Private Ip
*Ip address can be divided in to two positions. 
  Network Porition - It shows the Ip address of which network Porition
  Host Porition  - from the network it has the multiple host and from that it shows the specific host of Ip address 

IPV4 Address:It is made up of 32 binary bits.
             32 binary bits are broken in to 4 octets(1 octet =8 bits) and converted into decimals.
             The value of each octet ranges from 0 to 255 in decimal or binary.
             Decimal format of IPv4 is 192.68.10.11

MAC address:
           MAC stands for Media Access Control  
           Every node in LAN is identified with the help of MAC Address 
           IP address+location of a person 
           MAC address+Name of the person 
           mac address are unique throughout the world.
           Mac address 48 bits represented in hexadecimal  

Port address or Port number:
          In a node many process will be running.
          Data which are sent/receive must reach the right process 
          Every process in a node is uniquely identified using port numbers 
          Port=Communication endpoint
          Fixed port number and dynamic port number (0 - 65535)     
          resmon we tell what are the port number are running  

Switching :Computer network helps in deciding the best route for data transmissin because there are multiple paths in a larger network. one to one connection
Switching techniques:
                   Circuit Switching
                   Message switching 
                   Packet switching 
In Packet switching we have two approach:1.Datagram approach 
                                         2.Virtual circuit approach 

Circuit Switching:
                 A dedicated path is established between sender and receiver.
                 Before data transfer ,connection will be established first 
                 Example:Telephone network 
3 phases in circuit switching:
                 1.Connection establishment 
                 2.Data transfer 
                 3.Connection disconnection 

Message switching:
                 If a sender want to send a big data and this big data cannot  transfered into single streath and big data will be broken into single utility and each of peicies transmitted to intermediary node and then Intermediary node gets all the receive peices and constructed the full message and getting the complete unit then only it forwards the data.


Packet Switching:
                The internet is a packet switched network.
                Message is broken into individual chunks called as packets.
                Each packet is sent individually.
                Each packet will have source and destination ip address with sequence number.
                Sequence number will help the receiver to Reorder the packets,Detect missing packets and send acknowledgement 
Two approaches to packet switching:
1.Datagram approach
2.Virtual Circuit approach 

Datagram approach:
                Datagram packet switching is also known as connectionless switching.
                Each independent entiy is called as datagram 
                Datagram contain destination information and intermediary devices used this information to forward datagrams to right destination.
                The path is not Fixed
                Intermediate nodes take the routing decision to forward the packets.

Virtual Circuit Approach:
                Virtual circuit switching is also known as connection oriented switching.
                A preplanned route is established before the message are sent.
                call request and call accept packets are used to establish the connection between  sender and receiver.
                The path is fixed for duration of a logical connection. 
                
TCP/Ip Model:
Fours layers plays a major role in TCp\Ip Model:
Application layer:Dealing with the user Represents the data to the user ,plus encoding and dialog  control.Simply functionality of application layer,Presentation layer and session layer are combined to the single layer called application layer.
Transport layer:Supports communication between the diverse devices across the diverse network.
Internet Layer :the best path through the network
Network Access :It controls the hardware devices and media that make up the network.           

Tcp/IP Protocal suite:
Application layer:Name system(DNS),Host Config(BOOTP,DHCP),Email(SMTP,POP,IMAP),File Transfer(FTP,TFTP),Web(HTTP)
Transport Layer:Widely used protocals are UDP(Userdatagram protocal) and TCP(Transmission control protocal)
Internet layer:Routing protocal comes under internet layer.Router is a devices that works in network.
Network Access has protocals like ppp(point to point protocal) ,Ethernet is popular for LAN technologies to  be presise wired technologies and there are many interface drives that work on this network access.




Subnet-logical subdivision of an IP network or dividing ip network.Advantage of subnetting are  minimizes Broadcasting,Maximizes a Network Performance,secured.
Subnet Mask is a 32 bit number that is used to identify the network Portion and Host Portion in Ip address.
   1.Network bits as "1"
   2.Host bits as "0" 
Last octet  is reserved for specific function "0" indicates as a network address and "255" used to broadcasts.  

Types of Classes:Class A,Class B,Class C,Class D,Class Every
Class A -Ip ranges from 1.0.0.1 to 126.255.255.255, it supports 16,777,214 hosts on each 126 networks 
Subnet Mask-255.0.0.0
Network.Host.Host.Host<100.52.35.12>

Class B-Ip range from 128.0.0.1 to 191.255.255.255 ,it supports 65534 on each 16,382 networks
Subnet Mask-255.255.0.0 
Network.Network.Host.Host

Class C-Ip ranges from 192.0.0.1 to 223.255.255.255
Subnet mask-255.255.255.0
Network.Network.Network.Host 

Class D-Ip ranges from 224.0.0.1 to 239.255.255.255 


Reserved for Multicasting 

Class E-Ip ranges from 240.0.0.1 t0 254.255.255.255 
Reserved for Research and Development purpose         




Subnet-Division of Large IP Network into multiple small logical networks 
Two types of subnetting:1.Flsm=Fixed length subnet mask 
                        2.Vlsm=variable length subnet mask 

FLSM-Fixed Length Subnet mask 
      The main purpose is dividing the ip address with a same or equal size.
      Formula 2^n>=N      


VLAN-Virtual Local Area Network    
      Logical Group of devices that having same requirements are put in a single broadcast domain,that appreas working on a same LAN.Even they are in a different geographical locations   
      It is not restricted to a physical boundaries in a switched network.
      It can be spread across multiple switches in a Network or even mangaed in a single switch.
      Vlan ranges from 0 to 4095

      2 types of Ranges-Normal Range Vlan(1 to 1005)
                        Extended Range Vlan(1006 to 4095)
      Vlan 1 is known a native or default vlan    

Advantages:Network Broadcast message are minimized and hence network performace  be better.
           Easy Administration,Flexible and easy to manage
           Reduced cost and securied.   












 





















   



        
           
      











  







 















 
 















